AI chatbots, which are built from large
language models, don't perceive raw text
or characters in the same way humans do.
Instead, they process information as a
sequence of tokens, which are discrete
units derived from a predefined
vocabulary. But why tokens? Well, if we
use individual characters as a base
unit, it would be very difficult to
carry over semantic meanings. And if we
use whole words, it needs to accommodate
for long words, new terms, rare words,
typos, or variations which are not as
efficient. So this is why tokenization
is introduced as a way to break text
into smaller and more manageable units
which are often subwords. This then
becomes the perfect middle ground where
it can carry over key semantic meanings
while also being much smaller in size.
However, with this tokenization setup,
the flaw of grouping subwords as a unit
would create problems like being unable
to count characters and struggle to do
basic math. While this is often brute
force nowadays and flicks by simply
providing more data for the model to
learn, it still doesn't change the fact
that tokens would pose a barrier from
having the LLM to truly understand
languages on a level lower than a token.
So to make LMS have an endto-end
understanding just like us, we need to
somehow remove the artificial
abstraction that the tokenization
created allowing the model to learn
directly from the raw data. Which brings
us to this paper from Metal published 6
months ago called BLT short for bite
latent transformer that aims to address
the problem of tokenization with metal
just open sourcing an 8B BLT model and
people reminding me to make a video on
it which I swear I did plan to do it. I
just completely forgot about it. So here
you go. The video is finally here.
Please go easy on me in the comments. Or
maybe not because I'm segueing into
today's sponsor with me always talking
about the events and theoretical aspect
of AI. Sometimes we also need some
grounded introduction into how to apply
AI, especially AI agents, which is the
most popular use case in 2025. That's
why I like to share with you this free
resource from HubSpot called Master AI
agents in 2025, the strategic advantage.
In this resource, you will get two
comprehensive playbooks. One that is 42
pages long, which shows you exactly
where AI agents deliver the biggest
return on investment and another that's
a step-by-step checklist that walks you
through the AI agent rollouts. My
favorite section is the common pitfalls
and how to avoid them. in the 42page
playbook. As this is often overlooked
when building custom AI agents,
especially under an organizational
setting, AI agents may bear too many
expectations or contain challenges that
can often be overlooked. So having these
precautions can significantly improve
your chance of success. And of course,
it's a crazy powerful tool when you get
it working. In marketing, AI agents now
shoulder the repetitive work of content
repurposing, social scheduling, and
campaign analytics so your creatives can
stay focused on big ideas. In sales,
they can handle prospect research,
meeting prep, and personalized
follow-ups, buying precious time back
for relationship building. And across
operations, agents quietly file docs,
route requests, and service real-time
analytics, so your org runs like a
clockwork. Best part is you can download
these resources completely for free
right now. So, if you're ready to dive
into AI agents, check it out using the
link down in the description. And thank
you HubSpot for sponsoring this video.
Anyways, aside from the inconvenience of
having a subboard as a base unit,
tokenization is also a completely
separate pre-processing step that
requires a standalone training by
itself. And when a tokenizer is trained
primarily on English text, other
languages would struggle to integrate
smoothly, especially for things like
coding, which is heavily dominated by
English with other problems like minor
typos or variations that could end up in
very different tokenization that can
confuse the model and make jailbreak
easier. Not to mention how tokenizers
would also oversegment text in languages
underrepresented in the training data
leading to a longer less meaningful
sequences and poorer performance.
Compute-wise, there is still a lot of
room to improve too. Tokenization based
LLM allocate the same amount of
computational effort to every token
regardless of whether that token
represents a simple punctuation mark or
a informationrich technical term. Like
imagine you're using an entire
transformer pass just to add a period at
the end of the sentence. So the bite
latent transformer which from now on
I'll be referring to as BLT proposed a
tokenizer free architecture that is
designed to learn directly from raw bite
data instead of tokens which is
basically bite groups of a subword
learned from a finite vocabulary
determined through training. BLT uses
something called patches that are
dynamically grouped units which don't
have a fixed vocabulary. This straight
up addresses the problem of wasting
compute on a simple punctuation which I
just mentioned and can kind of allocate
more compute on more semantically
important words. But how should the
patches be defined? Then the core idea
is BLT should dynamically allocate
compute where it is most needed. So
predicting the next character in
subscribe to bycloud is a relative easy
decision. In contrast, predicting the
first character of the third word of
subscribe to becomes extremely difficult
because of all the potential options it
has. So at a part where a more important
decision is needed, this is where the
patching mechanism draws its boundary.
More specifically, BLT segments bite
sequences into patches based on the
entropy of the next bite prediction,
which they name it as entropy based
patching. The patch boundaries are then
determined using two criterias. First is
the global constraint where a new patch
starts if the entropy exceeds a global
threshold. This basically identifies
points of high uncertainty and it's used
here to mark as the beginning of a
patch. The second is the approximate
monotonic constraint where a new patch
starts if the change in entropy exceeds
a relative threshold. This basically
means the points that break an ongoing
trend of entropy level will be marked as
a new patch as it signals an unexpected
shift in complexity. So by segmenting
this way, BLT can create long patches
for predictable sequences, reducing the
number of steps the main transformer
needs to process. And conversely, for
information dense or unpredictable bite
sequences, patches might be shorter,
allowing the model to allocate more
computation. However, a problem would
occur if you set up this way. The bytes
itself would still be hard to carry over
semantic meaning even if it becomes a
patch later down the line. So in order
to build more meaningful patches, the
original individual bite is embedded
together with the engrams it is part of.
This engram basically pulls a bite's
immediate local context before being
patched together. And to prevent the
engram from creating an insanely large
vocabulary for all possible combinations
of bytes, a hashing called roll polyhash
is used to map these engrams to a fixed
size. So some engrams would have the
same hash but only on rare occasions. In
the big BLT architecture, this initial
processing which creates patches from
bytes would be done in the local
encoder. Then a lightweight transformer
layer would operate on these patches and
cross attention these byes into patch
representations where it is now
represented with numbers that contain
its abstract meaning. So these patch
representations are the ones that are
passed into the latent global
transformer, which means it's actually
not doing the next patch or next bite
prediction like what I initially thought
it's going to do, but instead it's a
next patch representation prediction.
Aside from that though, this latent
global transformer is pretty much a
standard transformer trunk that contains
many layers of transformer blocks. So
after running through these transformers
and its self attention on these patch
representations, the newly predicted
patch representation is then passed into
a local decoder which is yet another
lightweight transformer model that takes
these patch representations in the
hidden states produced by the local
encoder for the bite sequence to decode
everything back into bytes and form a
generated text. And with this VLT
architecture, it is able to match Llama
3 while using up to 50% fewer flops at
inference. This shows that the dynamic
patching and representation prediction
strategy can bring significant inference
efficiency without sacrificing
performance. On top of that, the paper
also showed a new scaling axis where an
efficiency gain can be adjusted through
the patch size alongside the model size
since token size is not something that
can be adjusted in tokenization based
LLM. So a new direction of potential
efficiency gain is unlocked. With this
research being the first flops
controlled scaling study of bite level
models up to 8 billion parameters and 4
trillion training bytes on top of them
releasing an open- source model. I think
this research is already providing a
really promising foundation for moving
the current tokenbased LLM paradigm
towards something on a lower level
because BLT has already shown
improvements on tasks that require
understanding of subword aspects such as
orthographic knowledge, phenology, and
low resource machine translation. And by
its very design, BLT sidesteps many
issues inherent to fix tokenizers,
including performing poorly on rare
rewards or multilingual language
modeling, which I would say the current
model still struggles very badly with.
There's also a brand new research that
was published a week ago that swaps out
tokenization for a unit that pulls raw
byes into compressed chunks. But one of
its major flaws is that it separates
bytes using spaces. So language without
explicit spacing like Chinese does not
work. Still, the architecture has a neat
upside. It can predict several bytes or
even multiple words in a single shot.
And yeah, that's it for this video. If
you want to learn more about bilton
transformer, you can go ask my website
findmyapers.ai. It can explain to you in
extreme detail about what it is, the
latest developments or even similar
ideas or applications that are very hard
to discover yourself. And thank you guys
for watching. A big shout out to Andrew
Chellius, Chris Leoo, Degan Gan, News
Research, Kanan, Robert Zaviasa, Leis
Muk, Ben Shainer, Marcelo, Ferraria,
Zay, Sheep, Poof, and Enu, DX Research
Group, and many others that support me
through Patreon or YouTube. Follow me on
Twitter if you haven't and I'll see
youall in the next